Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricard Lobs. And today I'm
joined by Doctors Andrew Dalton and Talbot Andrews. Doctor
Andrew Dalton is a returned guest. He is associate
professor in the Department of Political Science, the Center
for Behavioral Political Economy and the College of Business
at Stony Brook University. And Dr Talbot Andrews is
assistant Professor of Political Science at the University of
Connecticut. And they are both authors of climate games
experiments on how people prevent disaster and uh say
something, Doctor Dalton for people to, to see
this book. Uh The book just came out. Um
It's available on Amazon in both paperback and hardback
and you can also get it directly through University
of Michigan Press's website. And if you go to
their website, uh the book is actually available completely
free as a download too. So if you just
want an electronic copy of the entire thing, it's
a one stop shop, just download it for free.
Um And if you go to either my website
or Talbot's website, there'll be links. So you don't,
don't remember any specifics, you know, just remember one
of our names and you can find the book
if you decide you're interested in following up after
today.
Great. So uh I'm leaving links to that in
the description down below by the way. So uh
to start off with before we get into the
sort of game theory slash psychology of all of
these, and now tackling climate change is a sort
of, let's say global coordinations game. Uh Just to
set up the stage, let me ask you first.
At what point do we find ourselves uh at
right now when it comes to climate change, I,
I mean, how much are we into it? And
what are some of the worst potential effects and
consequences of it?
Yeah. So climate change is this huge complicated problem
and we're unfortunately already seeing the impacts of climate
change. So we're seeing especially more extreme weather, we're
seeing more severe hurricane seasons, we're seeing longer and
more severe wildfire seasons and as of right now,
it's mostly just going to get worse. Um But
where we are in fighting climate change is it's
no longer just a technological problem. We know how
to stop climate change. We have all these tools
available to us. The main challenge now is a
more political problem. How do we govern and implement
all of these different tools that are available to
us and that's where our work comes. And so
we're specifically interested in the public side of the
problem. How do we get everyday people to care
about climate change, to spend money, to support these
often expensive policies. And how do we design policies
that will most get people involved in paying for
climate change mitigation and disaster prevention?
And so I I mean, we're going to get
more into that as we go through the questions
here, but just uh give us perhaps a brief,
a brief overview of what would be the best
solutions that we are that we have available right
now. And the uh that are the ones that
we would need to implement and convince people to
implement.
Yeah, unfortunately, there is no one thing that we
can do that will totally stop climate change. But
thankfully, we have a lot of different tools available
to us. So one thing we absolutely have to
do is we have to reduce the amount of
electricity we generate from burning fossil fuels. We need
to be building renewable energy infrastructure like wind power
and solar power, but alone, that's not enough. So
on top of that, we also need to be
building more infrastructure to adapt to the disasters that
are already happening. We're already feeling some of these
impacts of climate change. Even if we switch to
completely fossil fuel free electricity today, we would still
face some of those impacts because of inertia in
the climate system. So we also need to be
investing in climate change adaptation and infrastructure. Uh This
one's a little bit more controversial but we probably
also need to be investing in technologies to help
buy us more time for this transition to renewable
energy. So investing in research on different types of
geoengineering, so technologies that help either temporarily cool the
planet or that help take carbon dioxide out of
the atmosphere. This doesn't solve the problem of us
still emitting a lot of fossil fuels, but it
just buys us some more time before we see
the worst impacts of climate change to make that
transition. So it's a huge problem and we're going
to need a whole collection of different solutions. Some
combination of these
things amongst the technological solutions, you will uh I
mean, they would also include the things like renewable
energy and nuclear power, right.
Yeah. Anything that will help us reduce the amount
of carbon dioxide that we're emitting.
Yeah. Uh And by the way, when we're talking
about solutions here, what would these solutions be for?
I mean, because uh basically what I'm asking you
is at this point is climate change still reversible
in any way or are we just talking about
mitigating climate change?
Yeah, so I'm really optimistic about these things. Um
I maybe would go a little bit insane studying
the problem if I didn't think it was somewhat
reversible. But my read of the science at least
is that it's on my side that it's not
too late to do something, we are certainly going
to see some negative impacts and we already are,
but we do still have time to reverse some
of the worst impacts of climate change. It's just
going to take a lot of coordinating a lot
of investment to make that happen effectively.
And uh so getting into the game theoretical side
of things now, why do you call the book
Climate Change Global Social Dilemma with the?
Yeah, good question. Um So uh the the first
thing to understand is the idea of a social
dilemma is a huge topic going back decades and
decades in political science, sociology, psychology, biology. So one
classic example of a social social dilemma is basic
law and order in a society. So, you know,
it's good for each one of us that we
don't have to worry too much that criminals will
assault us or that if we're brought before a
court, we won't be treated fairly. Um So, you
know, basic law and order is good for everybody.
But if you think of a fairly large society,
like even just, you know, a state in the
United States, not in the whole country, there's a
state. Um WHEN in order to fund law and
order, you know, we think of taxes pay for
that but you as an individual citizen, your taxes
are a tiny, tiny drop in a pretty large
bucket. So even though you benefit because crime is
being deterred by the work of police and the
court system, um there's really no individual benefit for
you in paying your taxes. If you withheld your
taxes, you'd have that money. And really the courts
would function, the police would function just as before.
So it's, you know, that's so, it's, that's why
it's called a dilemma. It's a social dilemma because
we're all better off when this thing is providing.
Um, BUT we, you know, individually, it might make
sense if we could somehow shirk uh contributing to
it for the kind of social dilemmas like law
and order or things like national defense, the, the
one, you know, a centralized state like the US
government steps in um you know, makes us pay
taxes and then, you know, that, that solves that
problem in, in that way. So that's a basic
social dilemma when it comes to the reason we
call um climate change and a mi and emissions,
a global social dilemma is they happen, it ha
it happens beyond the national borders, emissions that are
emitted anywhere in the world are going to affect
the entire world. Um So, and, and it's a
social dilemma in many of the same ways, you
know, everyone would benefit if the climate isn't changed.
But if you as an individual, human being, any
emissions you make are a high ky drop in
a very large bucket. So just like with your
taxes and law and order, why bother restricting yourself
when it comes to contributing uh emissions that might
change the atmosphere. In fact, even some, some, you
know, the US is not this way, but some
countries are small enough that it really doesn't matter
much what they do. Like a pretty small country
with a couple 100,000 people. Their choices aren't gonna
matter too much compared to huge juggernauts like the
US or China. Now, what makes climate change and
global, you know, emissions a, a difference from law
and order is that there's no centralized government. We
don't live under a one world government. So we
can't look to, I guess there's no single leviathan
that is overseeing us all who can force us
to do something that might be beneficial for everybody.
Um So what that means is that if we're
going to solve a problem, a global social dilemma,
it involves independent actors. In this case, the world
states or the world's nations working together to, to
solve the problem with no one, no one entity
who can, you know, make everyone do something they
might not otherwise want to do.
And I mean, we're probably talking about the largest
scale social co ordination problem that we probably have
at our, in our hands now right now, right?
Because I mean, it would have to involve the
entire globe, it would have to be done on
a global scale, right? And there's probably nothing bigger
than that when it comes to social coordinations,
right? Yeah, that's yeah, a lot of what we
explore in the book are all the problems that
come along with the fact that you're trying to
coordinate, you know, people with potentially different interests, different
motivations, different sorts of knowledge, different resources um as
is, you know, the actual case with the world's
countries. Um AND the people in the world. Yeah.
So it's a huge, uh you know, one of
the more complex kind of social and people have
dealt with usually social dilemmas are at best national
or maybe subnation or it might be like, how
do we manage, you know, the a particular fishery
off the uh the coast of Alaska? How do
we manage a water supply like the Colorado River,
which is already, you know, a challenging enough thing,
but this is much, you know, a much bigger
scale than any of those kind of uh you
know, classic real world examples of a social dilemma.
Mhm A and when we get into the economic
games, we present in the book, we'll probably come
back to uh why doing this at such a
scale will is also a complication. But in the
book, you get into some strategic challenges of climate
change. You talked for example about uncertainty, deciding for
others self created disaster, tensions between policymakers and the
public. Could you tell us a little bit about
that? I mean, what are these challenges and how
did you uh come up with them?
Yeah. So the, the reason we came up with
these um is just, you know, there's many challenges
we thought these were ones that were interesting that
were and were tractable to study with the kind
of tech tools we uh we are experts in
using. Uh SO that we're certainly not saying these
are just, these are the only challenges uh that
are involved in the prom. So one of, one
of the, the ones you mentioned is uncertainty. So
um the I PC uh IPCC, the Inter uh
Intergovernmental Panel on climate change, they regularly release reports
where they try to summarize the evidence on various
aspects aspects of climate change. Um A few years
ago, one of their reports said that they have
high confidence that things like tropical cyclones are going
to increase but less confidence for other types of
precipitation due to climate change. So there's different levels
of certainty with various elements of what's gonna happen
uh in the climate. And if we don't exactly
know what the targets are that we're trying to
avoid or things we're trying to hit. So there's
also uncertainty and things like how will a potential
technology work out if you try to scale it?
Like carbon capture and storage? What's you know, what's
gonna, what are the upsides or downsides of that?
What are the upsides of geoengineering or solar radiation
management uh techniques that involve speeding the atmosphere with
aerosols? If we're not sure how these things are
going to work out or what their effects will
be downstream, it's harder for countries to figure out?
Well, do I want to support this? Do I
not want to support this? Do I care whether
other people are going to support this? So, uncertainty
is a big problem in figuring out what we
should do if I don't know what you're gonna
do? How do I know what I should do?
Um Another problem that we investigate is deciding for
other people. So this is a very common kind
of political problem where often decision makers are at
a remove uh from the people who are gonna
be most affected by their decisions. One example we
use in our book is a tiny little island
nation called Kiribati. In the Pacific. There's about 100,000
people who live on this island country. Um AND
various project projections lead to different numbers, but many
projections suggest the water is gonna ocean is gonna
rise substantially in the vicinity of this island. Several
years ago, the World Bank used the island as
what they call the demonstration project to try to,
you know, to try to show that outside experts
investing millions of dollars can help a small country
uh avoid disaster. One of the things they did
was to help the country build what are called
sea walls, essentially walls that help stem the water
from, you know, rising water won't get farther inland
and it turned out that the sea walls ended
up being an embarrassing disaster. Uh Some people in
the area called them part of a larger graveyard
of short term investments in infrastructure. And at least
one of the act, one of the reasons people
thought they turned out so poorly is because they
were spearheaded to, to a large degree by people
who were remote, at a distant distant advisors. Uh
Not just not, you know, we didn't have a
full understanding of what local people wanted or how
to deal with the local environment. Uh So, you
know, that's just an example of this larger political
problem. Outsiders often don't have the same knowledge or
motivations of the people who are local. Um YOU
know, people who are working at the World Bank,
they wanna help Kiribati, but they also have the
funders and the bosses above them who are even
more remote and who maybe are pulling them in
different directions. And this is, you know, a general
problem with climate change because often many important decisions
will be made by people who are not especially
um affected by the potential for disaster. So people
in rich, you know, industrial countries will make a
lot of important choices. But it turns out it's
people in, you know, poor developing countries that face
larger risk of disaster. And of course many important
decisions will be made by people who are alive
right now. Uh But it's gonna be mostly people
in the future who are affected. Um So that's,
you know, this, this general problem of you know,
how do we make good decisions? Can we make
good decisions when those of us who are making
these decisions, aren't the people most affected by them?
Uh So let me just ask you one question
about, uh I guess that this would fit into
uncertainty but when it comes to the fact that
it's very hard for us, at least intuitively to
connect uh gas emissions with uh climate change or,
or to climate change. Does uh would that fall
into uncertainty? I mean, because uh for people who
are not scientifically literate, it's really, really hard for
them to understand how would that connection work? Would
that also play out here or not?
Yeah, I think so. I think that, yeah, I
think that would tie into the same theme of
uncertainty. There's all, there's all sorts of uncertainty, there's
uncertainty in what, how is what we're doing now
affecting the climate, how are technologies we could roll
out? How do those affect the climate? Um How
does economic choices we make? How are those going
to affect living standard? Um And so there's also
a balancing act between um you know, making good
choices uh that, that aren't going, you know, you,
you're not trying, you don't want to impoverish people
because that's, that, that's kind of defeating the purpose
of solving the problem. Um So there's uncertainty all
the way, I guess, I think we used the
phrase multiple times in the book, uncertainty all the
way down about a lot of these things.
And so why did you decide to focus specifically
on economic games in the book? What kinds of
knowledge can we get from those types of games
that would be relevant for a co ordination problems
such as climate change?
Yeah. So what you know, one thing we, we
want to make very clear is we're behavioral scientists.
So we're not people who are crunching the numbers
on major economic policy uh policies. We're not the
ones who are directly designing uh uh technology for
engaging in carbon capture and storage. So what we
study is how people think and we want to
study how people think about the problems of climate
change. There's lots of tools that we use other
social sciences use to study how people think about
political issues, things like survey experiments or public opinion
polling or focus groups. Uh What we want to
do is use our comparative advantage. So our research
team uh myself Talbot and our co-author uh Ruben
Klein, who couldn't be here today. Um All of
what what all of us do is in addition
to other kinds of techniques we use uh experimental
economic games. So the basic idea of these things,
it's really simple. What you're trying to do is
to simulate in a laboratory, the kinds of strategic
problems people and politicians face out there in the
real world, but you do it in a laboratory
and in a way that makes it really transparent
to the researcher. So basically, it's you, it's called
a game for a reason. You're literally given a
series of rules and you can make choices within
these rules that affect how much money you and
other people earn. So one of the classic games
in this, I'll get two quick examples. One of
the classic games that maybe uh many of your
listeners are familiar with is called the dictator game
in the dictator game. Um We might, if I
was the researcher, I might pair you and tal
it up anonymously through a computer network, randomly pick
one of you give you $10 and say you
can divide this $10 any way you want between
yourself and the other anonymous player. And that's the
simplest possible uh game that people typically study, you
know, how would you divide a fixed sum of
money and then one. So that's, that's it. We
can see what would you do. So if you
give a lot, we might infer that you're generous
or that you're reversed to inequality or if you
keep a lot, we might infer the opposite that
you're stingy or that you're happy with inequality, things
of that nature. And then to make it just
a little bit more complicated, a variation on that
game uh called the ultimatum game simulates bargaining. So
that one's very similar. So in, but instead of
you Ricardo making a, a decision all on your
own. You make a proposal essentially an ultimatum to
Talbot. Uh So you might say out of this
$10 Talbot, I'm gonna give you $1 and keep
nine. And again, this is usually anonymous, but I'll
use people's names. So Talbot then considers that proposal
and she might decide. Um, WELL, no, thanks. She
rejects your proposal. And in that case, uh what
happens is essentially the money, you know, bursts in
the fire and disappears. So no one gets anything.
So if you Ricardo don't make a, a uh
a proposal that Talbot's willing to accept, no one
gets anything. Uh And so that's designed to simulate
kind of a high stakes one shot bargaining situation.
So the benefit of this. So, you know, that
we and we'll come to the games we, we
tended to use. But again, the benefit is by
making these things really concrete and very transparent to
the researchers, we can try to understand uh very
what you all are doing. The problem is if
we try to just look at the real world
now, that's important. Many me, you know, a lot
of useful research does that, but the problem with
the real world is we don't know all the
rules, all the institutions, all the constraints, all the
material incentives or other types of incentives that people
face like a real president making some decision about,
say going to war. We don't know what intelligence
the president had privy to, we don't know what
kinds of pressure groups we're putting the most behind
the scenes, you know, pressure on them, all sorts
of things. We might not know that led to
their decision. So it's important to, you know, to
understand how real presidents make decisions, how real policymakers
make decisions. But we like these games because you
can really dig in and see exactly how people
respond to problems that you as a researcher create.
So you know, everything about the little world that
your research participants are facing.
But just before we get into the specific kinds
of games you explore in the book, there's perhaps
two sets of important questions here. So the first
one is um I mean, what are the limitations
of these games in terms of how much should
we expect them to really translate into real life?
Right? I mean, because there's all, there's always the
issue when we study things in the lab that
they might not have uh much ecological validity, let's
say that they wouldn't work the same way uh
outside of the lab in an ecologically valid uh
setting, let's say. So, I mean, to what extent
does that criticism apply here?
Yeah, so there's kind of two types of data
that I I would point to. So of course,
that's a reasonable worry, very reasonable worry. One type
of data I would point to is a an
obvious concern you might have is uh you know,
I use an example of $10. Now, almost any
real world political problem that we care about has
stakes much bigger than $10. So you might worry
that these games because the stake sizes are gonna
be relatively small on the order of a few
dollars, $10.20 dollars, uh, that they don't, might not
tell us anything. So, researchers actually have tested that.
Um, SOMETIMES, you know, researchers with lots of money
have put pretty big stakes on the line and
you find um not ex not quantitatively identical results,
but people play the game pretty much the same
way, even if the stake sizes are, are dramatically
a larger, like some great examples of this come
from work uh by anthropologists who took game like
the ultimatum game and the dictator game around the
world. And if you're from a, you know, relatively
rich industrialized society yourself with reasonable grant money and
you go to a small scale forging or horticulturalist
society, the kind of money you have available, you're
able to pay what for them might represent the
wages they would earn over a week or even
a month for a single brief session of these
games. When anthropologists do that, they tend to find
some quanti quantitative variation uh society from society, but
broadly speaking, like in the dictator game, um you,
you tend to find that across huge changes in
the type of ecology, the type of the place
in the world people are living, they tend to
give away 25% to 50% of the stake. Um
So they tend to kind of a narrow range
they give and again, that's like with a huge
amount of money, sometimes a week or a month
of wages on the line. Um Another way you
could look at like, well, do, what do these
games capture particularly for our purposes? Lay people like
the people who are normal experimental participants, random people
who are willing to participate online or ST undergraduates
at a university, they're not the people who are
in the room when governments make big decisions, right?
So you might worry that lay people don't behave
like politicians. Uh But other political scientists have taken
the gains similar to the ones I've been talking
about or other kind of decision tasks that, you
know, um that psychologists have studied for decades on,
on lay people and have asked various samples of
actual politicians to play these games or other people
who are uh elites in some way or another,
maybe not politicians themselves, but people who might have
worked at the state department or worked in major
corporations. And when you do this, you also, you
find that these people tend to play the game
again, not literally identically with laypeople but broadly in
the same way. Um So if you, you know,
if you drive, you Ricardo a layperson, drive a
hard bargain and most people might drive a hard
bargain, then these elites will drive a hard bargain
in a similarly constructed game. So those are kind
of two kinds of evidence. I would point to
that suggest um these games are to the typical
way these games are played for laypeople playing for
smallish stakes are still likely to capture um at
least some important elements about the real world. One
thing you that it is more difficult to create
in the game just real briefly would be to
create long term identities that are important to people.
I can't tell people to just suddenly be a
Democrat or be a Republican when playing my game,
if that's not who they are in real life,
right? Uh So those kind of issues are, are
difficult to experimentally create. Although of course, you can
bring in Democrats and see how they play or
bring in Republicans, but you can't easily create these
long term enduring identities in a game or like
nationalities. Of course. So if you're interested in that,
you can, you can study people, but you can't
exactly create that in the same way, we can
create a similar acronym of trying to cooper uh
for mutual benefits. So I think those are, you
know, those are there are, you know, this is
why we shouldn't, we're not saying you should only
use games. It's just this one source of data
that, you know, we think that's our comparative advantage
here is to use that to understand how climate
uh people think about the climate.
Uh But then, uh I mean, to what extent
should we expect the results of these games to
uh scale up in the sense that they would
apply to? Uh I mean, in this case, a
global, potentially a global scale because that's the scale
we're talking about here uh be because I mean,
you mentioned for example, politicians and also regular people,
but we need both and ideally the entire world
in the sort of coordinations game. So uh to
what extent can we say that for example, the
results we get from uh making people play these
games in the lab and in different kinds of
controlled settings would uh scale up, let's say,
yeah. So I, I think what I would say
about this is the mechanisms that we observe in
the lab, we believe persist outside of the lab.
But there are all sorts of other mechanisms that
we're holding constant within the lab that are then
operating outside of the lab. And so I I
think that the things we observe and the insights
that we find are real and they persist. The
more complicated question is how do they interact with
the other things happening in the world that might
shape that behavior? Um But so one example of
this in some of my own ongoing work, I'm
now asking people to contribute real money, not to
prevent simulated disaster, but to contribute real money to
actual charities after disaster to engage in that kind
of relief in the insights that we find from
the book are persisting outside of the lab. And
so not only would we say you shouldn't only
do econ games, but we as researchers are also
engaged in taking those insights to other methods and
are observing that those mechanisms are still working.
And which kinds of specific economic games do you
think better capture the aspects of social coordinations that
are most relevant to solving climate change?
Yeah. So we we specifically rely on a threshold
public goods game, we call it the disaster game.
And uh we'll talk a little bit more about
that in a minute. Um But to use a
pretty famous quote that I love very much, all
models are wrong, but some models are useful from
George Box, right? So kind change is a huge
complicated problem and we are specifically interested in the
social dilemma nature of climate change and how do
we get people to contribute despite there being an
incentive to free ride off of everybody else's contributions.
So in this case, a modified public goods game
makes sense because it captures that social dilemma. But
there are other dimensions of the climate problem that
could be modeled with very different types of experiments
that I think would also give us insights into
the problem. So for example, other people have brought
up that climate change is also a distributive problem
who's going to pay for climate change and also
who's going to benefit from climate change, climate change
mitigation isn't just costly. It also creates all sorts
of benefits for all sorts of different types of
people. And so there's room for very, very different
types of games that could also give us insights
into the problem just because the scale of the
problem is so big.
And so let's perhaps explore some of the specific
kinds of issues that these games could apply to.
And I mean, the different kinds of factors that
play a role in how we coordinate our behaviors
when it comes to tackling climate change. So uh
in the book, at a certain point, you talk
about how we can use the disaster game specifically
to study how people respond to different technologies to
stop climate change. So, uh I mean, could you
tell us a little bit about that, which factors
play a role in this specific case and what
tend to be the kinds of reactions that people
uh have to this kind of game
here? Sure, tell me, do you want to lead
us through the basic game? And I'll take on
like how one of the earlier studies we did
on technology?
Yeah. So just to give you a foundation of
what does the disaster game look like, um the
way it works is that players are in groups
of 4 to 6 people depending on the experiment.
Uh And together, they face an oncoming simulated disaster
that's going to destroy their money that they have
at the start of the game. They have to
simultaneously uh decide whether and how much they're going
to contribute to disaster prevention. If together they contribute
enough, then disaster stopped. They get to keep the
remaining money. Um If they don't contribute enough disaster,
still strikes. And either way, whatever they've contributed to
disaster prevention is gone forever. So the basics of
this game captures two of the most important dimensions
of the climate problem. So first, it's a social
dilemma, everybody's better off if they contribute enough money
to stop the disaster. But everybody also has an
incentive to contribute nothing and hope the rest of
their group will carry the burden of stopping disaster.
And then second, it captures this threshold nature of
climate change. And I think this is really important
in two different ways. So first thinking broadly about
the climate problem, you've probably heard if global mean
temperature rise exceeds two C, this is where we're
certainly going to see more and worse damages. So
there's not a linear relationship between how much carbon
dioxide we emit and how bad climate change is
going to be. There are these tipping points in
the system where if we pass these tipping points,
things are going to get a lot worse, much
more quickly and potentially be irreversible. And so that
threshold captures that dimension on a more local level,
this is also important um building half a levy
to prevent a flood, doesn't prevent half a flood,
right? You have to actually finish building this kind
of prevention, infrastructure to reap those benefits. And so
that's what the disaster game is meant to capture.
And then throughout the book, we have all sorts
of different ways that we change that basic framework
to answer all of these questions. So Andy, do
you wanna take it away with the first?
Yeah. So one of our, one of the first
projects we worked on as a team, um The
kind of the starting point was that organizations like
the Intergovernmental panel on climate change, the IPCC, they,
they argue that uh we're not going to decelerate
temperature rises fast enough if we use kind of
straightforward mitigation, um we're gonna have to use, they,
they argue at least that we might need to
consider technologies like carbon capture and storage. So we're
not gonna just omit less. We might have to,
for instance, suck some carbon out of the air.
And in a sense, these technologies are risky. Uh
Not because they might blow up in a nuclear
holocaust or something, but because they have potentially high
upsides, but no one's ever scaled them before. So
it could be a lot of investment that just
Peters out and leads nowhere. So we need to,
the I PC IPCC argues we need to try
them but you know, maybe they'll be a dead
end. Um So what we wanted to know is,
will, you know, will people be able to integrate
the problems they face? Like how, you know, t
Talbot mentioned, this is like a threshold, how high
is the threshold with how much risk they're willing
to bear in order to try to meet that
threshold. So again, imagine yourself in one of our
games, you're in a four person team. Um And
we tell you, you each got some money and
uh let's say you have, you know, you have
$20 and the way that you can prevent disaster
is by contributing to this threshold, we give you
a monetary amount. But um we give you two
ways to contribute. If you want to contribute, you
can just give your money directly or you can
basically put it into a slot machine and if
you win your money is doubled, but if you
lose your money just disappears. So the idea is
that this is sort of simulating the contrast between,
you know, more traditional mitigation ideas like making more
windmills or uh finding ways to emit less by
more efficient vehicles or something of that nature versus
this sort of big picture big, you know, kind
of go go big or go home technology where
maybe it will pay off, but maybe the investment
will just go Kaput. Uh So will people uh
you know, how will people decide how to invest
their money between these two forms. So the what
we did then in these experiments was again, if
you were in our group, imagine, you know, there's
uh ever if you, some groups have a really
low threshold where it's easy to just contribute some
money directly and you can probably meet the problem.
Other groups are giving a higher and higher and
higher threshold. And if you do the math, um
you know, some very complex math, you would discover
that it's probably in your interest then as a
group to have a lot of people engage in
these risky investments. And so we wondered whether normal
people who were the ones who they don't make
the decisions in the big rooms with presidents, but
they are the ones who elect presidents and prime
ministers. So their opinion still matters quite a bit.
Would they understand this problem and being, uh, you
know, be, be willing to engage in risk to
solve ever higher thresholds? So, um, that's what we
did. We tested whether people could do that and
we actually, there's different kind of theories out there.
Some theories are pretty pessimistic about people's abilities to
reason correctly about risk and about complex decisions. Um,
BUT, uh our back, some of my background and
Talbot's background is both, uh, we're from partially trained
in evolutionary psychology and it turns out that evolutionary
biologists, um, and, and psychologists have discovered animals and
humans are actually really good at balancing riskiness with
the kinds of thresholds that they face. So we
were, we were thinking that people would actually be
pretty good at this problem. And in fact, the
quality of their decisions astounded even us, even though
we were already kind of optimistic, people were really
sensitive to the threshold and did a very good
job of balancing which kind of investment to make,
depending on just how difficult meeting that threshold would
be. Um So, you know, uh basically, when people,
when averting disaster became ever more difficult, people were
more likely to, you know, take a gamble on
this sort of a stylized choice meant to simulate
real world uh technology like carbon capture and storage.
Uh So, but uh I mean, tell us perhaps
about specific kinds of technologies that you've studied in
these games and I mean, what kinds of reactions
do people tend to have to them?
Yeah. So in other work, what we've looked at,
so this is that was a study on like
carbon capture and storage. Um We've also done ones
that are designed to to more simulate things like
um uh solar radiation management, a fancy word for
doing any doing things in the atmosphere to reflect
light back into space. So one kind of thing
that's actually in the grand scheme of things relatively
cheap is seeding the atmosphere with aerosols or other
types of chemicals that could reflect light back into
space. Um And that's risky in a different way.
So I mentioned the carbon capture stuff. The big
risk of that is it just doesn't pay off,
but when it comes to messing with the atmosphere
in other ways, adding more chemicals in the air,
they're supposed to redirect light. Uh THAT could, there's
various, you know, worries that that could change other
aspects like weather patterns throughout the world. So not
only could that simply fail, that could actually back
fire um and hurt people. Um And if you
try to implement that. And so in some of
our studies, we tried to simulate that kind of
problem where you have the choice of a technology
that could actively hurt other people. And what we
did there was you would play in these groups
as before in one version of the experiment, you
would have to make your decisions just as a
group. Um Another version there would be oh and
and one person would be one person in your
group would also have the option of uh choosing
whether to try, you know, to basically see the
atmosphere with these aerosols. So we're, we're kind of
proceeding along two tracks. Everyone in the group can
try to just directly contribute to, you know, this
threshold. Another person can try like a silver bullet
that might meet the threshold immediately, but it could
backfire and literally it hurt everyone in the group.
So that's one version of the experiment in another
version of the experiment just like what I said.
Except the person who gets to decide whether there's
geoengineering is a total outsider to the group. So
they have no role in the group whatsoever. They
don't suffer any personal costs or benefits whatsoever. So,
you know, maybe they won't care enough to make
a good decision or maybe they even be too
risk taking. Maybe they're just like hell, yeah, let's
just do this and see what happens. But in
fact, when we, and when we run these experiments,
people in the outsider role do exactly what insiders
would have done in their place. So insiders are
pretty good about picking when to use or not
use geoengineering based on things like the size of
the threshold, uh outsiders just as thoughtful, just as
sensitive, they do exactly what insiders would have wanted
them to do. So that's not. So that's, you
know, another kind of technology um that we've tried
to simulate in the lab. And also um uh
you know, example of like this, the theme of
making decisions on behalf of other people too.
Uh So that's about the technological side of things.
But uh how about helping other groups of people?
I mean, how do you study that through economic
games? And what kinds of results uh do you
get?
Yeah. So real briefly, you know, the, the earlier
games I I mentioned. So the ones where uh
it's about capturing a car uh excuse me, uh
carbon capture and storage. So those ones we initially
had people play just on their own behalf. So
you have to delicately manage the size of your
threshold and whether you contribute directly to it or
will you take a gamble? Will you play a
slot machine in other work? Um What we did
was very simple, tweak. We had some people continue
to do that as before and we had other
people, uh, who were, uh, told you're gonna make
these decisions, but they're only going to affect a
bunch of strangers, they're not going to affect you
directly. So just like the games where things could
backfire with the uh aerosols in the air here,
similar kind of deal where a bunch of outsiders
have to make decisions for insiders. But the the
difference here is this is back to a group
of people. So now it's not just you in
isolation being like the president making decisions, you're back
to a group. There's still this kind of social
dilemma aspect, but it's a social dilemma that impacts
other people. So what do you do? Well, surpri
like, like this is many points in our research
program, we were frankly shocked at how nice and
uh strategic people were. So in our games where
the group making these decisions about whether to take
a gamble or not, they were just as happy
to contribute to a bunch of strangers as to
contribute to preventing their own disaster. So they were
very generous with helping other people prevent disaster. That's
interesting. But you might wonder. Well, are they not
good at doing that though? Do they not pay
as much attention when they're doing it for other
people? But no, they were just as uh accurate
at, you know, t trading their riskiness with the
quality of the, the difficulty of the problem they
faced. So whether you're making decisions for yourself or
for others, um, people were just as good as
managing this kind of multiple kind of technological problems.
So again, we were frankly kind of surprised how,
how kind and, and good people were at making
these decisions.
Ok. So I guess that's already some reason for
optimism. But uh le let's talk now about the
fact that as you mentioned earlier here, uh most
of the costs are going to be paid very
unfortunately by more vulnerable people, people from poorer countries.
So how willing are people? Uh I mean, uh
what extent are they willing to go in order
to avoid disaster for other people? I mean, they've
also said that. So what do we know about
it?
So, yeah, we do have some data on that
with these are some studies with our colleagues, Alessandro
Delponte and Nick Seltzer along with our, our, the
colleague who wrote this book with us Ruben Klein.
Um WHAT we tested in those studies was, would
people in these kind of games be willing to
constrain their own behavior to, you know, kind of
pass up benefits to prevent other people from experiencing
disaster. So let me make this concrete in these
games. We sort of, we tried to simulate sort
of the broad sweep of human history where at
one stage of world history, we engaged in economic
development and industrialization where you know, you could take
some, you could essentially in our game. We simulated
that by just saying, hey, you can take some
money from a common pool if you want, just
take some cash totally cool. The problem is the
more cash you take at that early industrialization, economic
development stage. In a later stage of the game,
you're gonna play the disaster game. And when you
face that, you know, we have this threshold problem
can you can you meet the threshold to prevent
disaster from coming. Well, the more you take earlier,
the higher the threshold gets. So there's sort of
this balancing act between um you know, industrializing and
make have an economic development versus some sort of
economic uh environmental problems that you create later on.
So in one version of the game, you yourself
have to balance those two problems, your group has
to. So there, you know, we using some game
theory math, we could predict, you know, what, how
much people should uh take from in the earlier
stage of industrialization in order to sort of maximize
their earnings across both of these stages. That's, that's
easy. Uh But the problem is that's not the
real world. It's different sets of people who are
facing these two different kinds of choices. So we
also had a condition where uh earlier different sets
of people are harvesting money in the economic development
stage and a separate set faces the environmental threshold
problem that was created by the earlier people. So
what we found was unlike some of our other
results, people didn't literally play uh exactly as they
would want to have played for themselves. They did
take some more money, but they, they were relatively
constrained in how much they took. So they were
pretty good about not sending like a ridiculously hard
problem on to future generations. So that's, that's, you
know, kind of a, a reassuring finding. And one
of the things we did too was most of,
you know, some of our people are students playing
in our lab in the uh in New York.
On one version though we had people playing online
uh Americans who are either creating problems for other
Americans or Americans creating problems that were then sent
to players in India. So a different country entirely
on the other side of the world. So you
might think when they send them to a totally
different nationality, they stop caring as much. In fact,
that didn't make any difference whatsoever. People were just
as circumspect in creating environmental problems where they were,
they sent it to Cocom Patriots um versus, you
know, an out group member on another continent. So,
um you know, again another set of like findings
that sort of astounded us and how like quality,
the quality of people's decisions and how reasonably generous
they were.
But another very relevant question here is as individual
citizens, it would also be ideal if we changed
some of our habits and particularly people in more
developed countries because we consume more and we have
certain luxuries that we don't want to abdicate. I
mean, how willing are we to constrain ourselves a
bit more to avoid uh emissions? I mean, how
do we study that?
Uh HM I don't know if we directly studied
that particular question. We studied other questions that involve
inequality between people but not whether inequality between people
uh leads them to constrain themselves. Uh MORE, more
or less. Yeah, Talbot, do you have any thoughts
on that?
So that we have not done this work? There
is interesting work taking place outside of the lab
on how do you get everyday people to actually
ait less? And it, it's a huge complicated problem
um with some fantastic work that's more focused on
what are people doing in their day to day
lives.
So uh another topic then would be uh tensions
between leaders and citizens and their relationship. So uh
when it comes to the more, let's say economic
or game theoretical aspect or approach to this question,
I mean, how do you approach it? And what
are some of the most important aspects to tackle
here.
Yeah. So here, what we're really interested is the
interface between publics and elites. So when does the
public trust elites to deliver effective mitigation policy? And
when do elites trust the public to behave accordingly
and to support those effective mitigation policies? So to
be clear in these experiments, we hold aside climate
change denial, we hold aside partisan polarization and really
focus on how different institutions might change people's trust.
So take, for example, from the public side, the
case of disaster prevention, um there's this big puzzle
in the literature that finds the public tends not
actually to be very supportive of disaster prevention spending,
which is a huge problem. Um Disaster prevention spending
is much more economically efficient than just spending on
relief after a disaster happens. But there are also
all sorts of things that you can't bring back
that you could have prevented. So for example, loss
of life, you can save people with disaster prevention,
but you can't bring someone back after a disaster
has struck. And this has been historically, largely interpreted
as evidence that voters are just not that sophisticated
that they don't realize they would be much better
off if they were spending on disaster prevention. But
there's another possibility. Um So the problem with disaster
prevention is it's hard to know how bad would
a disaster have been without the prevention because we
just don't observe that world the way with relief
I can see like there is a person getting
rescued and there are like firemen coming and dealing
with this problem. You just don't get the same
thing with disaster prevention and this is especially problematic
when politicians have a lot of discretion over those
prevention funds. Um So one of my favorite examples
of this, the mayor of Kingfisher Oklahoma, which is
this tiny little town in Oklahoma that's built between
these two rivers that floods every few years. He
got this huge grant from the state of Oklahoma
to deal with this cyclical flooding that the town
had. And he took the money and just um
bought out all of his own businesses that were
on the floodplain and used his own construction company
to do that. And it was one of those
cases where this is disaster prevention, but it's much
harder for the public to pay attention to that,
the way that they can with relief and to
monitor that. And so what we did to test
this to test whether voters just don't realize they
should be investing in prevention or whether they're worried
about that kind of corruption. And taking advantage of
the spending is we ran experiments where we introduced
a leader. So the way that this worked is
that players didn't know exactly how much it costs
to prevent disaster and their leader does know and
then their leader tells them like, hey, it's actually
pretty inexpensive or I'm sorry, but disaster prevention is
just going to be really expensive. And we essentially
manipulated whether the leader had an incentive to be
corrupt, could they skim money off the top? And
we find that players are incredibly sensitive to this,
that they're much more trusting of leaders who don't
have that incentive to behave in a corrupt kind
of way that essentially these funds are pre committed.
The leader doesn't get to skim. And in this
instance, voters really support disaster prevention policy. And so
we interpret this much more optimistically that some of
these roadblocks to getting voters to support climate change
mitigation and to support disaster prevention aren't because they
just don't realize it's important. But instead it's an
opportunity to design institutions that will increase support for
this kind of spending. Um From the leader side,
we were also curious whether leaders could anticipate this
kind of sophistication. And we looked at this in
a slightly different domain. So we looked at this
again with the case of geoengineering and solar radiation
management. Um A big concern in the policy space
is that if we deploy geoengineering, if we research
geoengineering, if we even talk about geoengineering that basically
people will stop supporting climate change mitigation, they'll say
like, oh I trust this. Um LIKE wild technology
is just going to solve the problem. So why
would I bother like supporting building more expensive wind
turbines which is a problem because we need to,
we need to still build wind turbines, we need
both of those things even if we do successfully
deploy geoengineering. And so this is called uh a
moral hazard. Um WHERE deploying geoengineering will leave everybody
worse off because they won't support climate change mitigation.
We find limited, no evidence that everyday people actually
engage in that moral hazard. And this is echoed
by a ton of survey research, a ton of
other experiments showing that people still support climate change
mitigation even when geoengineering is brought up. In fact,
sometimes they want mitigation even more because they think
the idea of spraying aerosols in the air to
reflect sunlight is terrifying and horrible. And so they
say I will build as many wind turbines if
you want me to build, if you promise not
to do that. But from the leader side, we
find that people anticipate others will engage in a
moral hazard. And so they propose policies that are
less effective because they underestimate the sophistication of their
peers. And so we get this sort of backfiring
effect and this is largely what we're interested in
is this interface between the public and the elite
when it comes to designing and getting support for
effective mitigation policy.
So this has a lot to do with trust,
right? I mean, to what extent, particularly common people
can trust their leaders to really communicate a good
and valuable information and really do what they say
they're going to do or achieve the results. They
say they want to achieve. Right. Mhm. Uh Do
you have anything to add to that? Doctor Dalton
or?
Yeah, I let me just add one more thing
on the, the question of trust. Um We focus
specifically on institutions and how institutions constraining leaders can
generate trust. So I trust a leader not to
behave in a corrupt way because they're operating within
an institution that doesn't let them behave in a
corrupt way. I think this is one of the
points where taking the insights outside of the lab
is going to be especially critical because unfortunately, we
know in other political science research that we tend
to trust messages from political elites who we already
trusted. And so Democrats like, aren't listening to Republican
senators telling them about disaster prevention. Republicans aren't listening
to the New York Times when it's telling them
about disaster prevention. And so this is a place
where I'm excited to see more of the marrying
between these sort of incentivized games and the political
complexity, especially in the United States.
So um another way by which people have used
disaster games is to study inequality. I mean, I
we've already mentioned the issue of inequality as it
applies to climate change as well because of course,
people from different backgrounds, different countries, poorer regions more
vulnerable will suffer more from climate change than we
in the more developed countries, for example. So what
can we learn about inequality through disaster games?
Yeah, so we we've run the disaster game and
others have used the disaster game to add inequality.
So there can be inequality in the risks that
people face. How likely is it the disaster will
strike or how much is disaster going to take
from you? There can also be inequality in the
resources people have to fight climate change. And so
maybe some individuals are given more of an endowment,
some of them are given less of an endowment.
Unfortunately, we find inequality is one of the biggest
impediments to getting people to coordinate around successful climate
change medication. So when there's inequality in the risks
people face or in the resources people have to
fight climate change mitigation, it still tends to work
out pretty well. The problem is when there's inequality
in both, when some people face very high risk
and those people have the fewest resources to fight
climate change is where we see depressed levels of
success. Um And unfortunately, that's probably the situation that
closest mirrors what's happening in the real world. However,
even in these situations where we see the worst
outcomes, they're still pretty good. We almost never observe
a situation. We never observe a situation where more
than a handful of people refuse to contribute anything.
And so even though there's decreased cooper operation with
this extreme inequality, there are still very high levels
of co-operation in what tends to help are clearly
defining people's responsibilities, is making sure that people are
contributing according to their resources or according to their
risk and coordinating around who is responsible for addressing
this problem can really alleviate those problems of inequality.
Great. So uh let me just ask you both
one final general question. So we've talked about he
here about how we can apply disaster games and
probably also other kinds of games to understand uh
people's psychology that is particularly relevant to how we
can tackle climate change. And we've talked about uh
helping other groups of people, for example, how the
tension between leaders and their citizens and other topics
here. Uh Looking at all of these studies and
results that you and other people got. I mean,
are you optimistic about tackling climate change or not?
Yeah, I think um I think our, our book
is pretty optimistic. We and we are pretty optimistic
people about it. Um You know, if we to
summarize very, you know, very quickly, the kind of
like what we found, we find, uh people are
delighted seemingly to not only work together for, to,
to help themselves as a group, but to help
complete strangers. Um THAT if you design things, the
correct way, leaders and citizens don't need to be
at odds, they can trust each other and often
they want to work together effectively. Um And that
uh people are pretty good at making these kinds
of many of these kinds of decisions, at least
the ones we discovered. So like the stuff about
balancing risk and reward. People are great at that.
Uh In the closing chapter of our book, um
we, we kind of, we summarize this and we
kind of outline what we see as the big
challenge going forward, which is that given that people
seem really cooper really intelligent about this stuff. We
think that the bigger the big issue going forward
is uh that scientists who actually so not us,
we're behavioral scientists, but scientists who study the climate
and people who are technologists, you know, they, they
and with the help of behavioral scientists, we need
to convince citizens that we actually do understand these
problems accurately. And the solutions being proposed are reasonable
and appropriate solutions to those problems. Once citizens buy
in to those things, the problem is so is
described correctly and the solutions are described correctly, our
game suggests then they're, they're happy to do the
right thing. Um 11 interesting thing about our, our
games is that, you know, we, we directly give
you the rules, we give you the stakes and
people believe us. So we have people leaving uh
open ended comments at the end of our experiments
and people who uh you know, scream that climate
change, complete hoax. Um THEY play just like everybody
else, right? So uh they, they once they buy
in and they know these are the rules, these
are the stakes, it doesn't matter what their, their
beliefs about the Real World were so in the
real world then, um We think that's one of
the most important um, elements that is creating this
buy in and in, in the public. Um So,
you know, you know, gaining the trust of the
public as far as the scientific facts about the
problem.
Uh Would you have anything to add to that?
Doctor Andrews or?
Yeah, just that I agree with Andy, we have
a lot of reasons to be very optimistic. Um
Which is maybe not what you would assume, thinking
about studying climate change and climate disaster. Um And
the question is, how do we get people to
believe in these rules of the game that climate
change is a problem that it is caused by
our emitting carbon dioxide to get people coordinating around
this issue?
Great. So the book is again Climate Games experiments
on how people prevent disaster. Uh I'm leaving of
course, a link to it in the description box
down below. And uh doctors Dalton and Andrews, would
you like just to tell the audience where they
can find you and your work on the internet?
Sure. Yeah. Uh If you uh type in Andrew
dalton.com, that'll take you to my web page or
you can go to uh to Twitter or X
at at Andy Dalton uh that also eventually lead
you to my web page and there's links for
the book, like I said, it's free to download.
If you go to University of Michigan Press website.
Um So, oh, and also I would just as
a plug, the book is written so that you
are able to pick and choose what chapters you
want to read, depending on what topic. So if
one of the topics we talked about is really
interesting, interesting to you and you don't care about
anything else that's fine. The book is designed to
be modular in that way. So just, you know,
feel free to download and just read what you're
interested in
and Doctor Andrews, where can people find you on
being through that?
Yeah, my website is Talbot dash. Andrews.com. So you
can see a lot more of my ongoing work
there. Um You can also find me on X
and on blue Sky. Thankfully, there aren't that many
talbots out there. So I'm pretty easy to track
down on both of those sites. Um And just
to add to Andy's plug about our book, it's
free to download. Uh It has a pretty clear
crash course in why use behavioral economics at all.
So even if you're teaching something related to climate
change, but about econ games, we have what I
think is a pretty nice introduction to that method
as well.
Great. So I'm leaving links to all of that
uh in the description of the interview and thank
you both so much for taking the time to
come on the show. It's been a real pleasure
to talk with you. Thank you, Ricardo.
Thank you for having us.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew
Whitten Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Condors
Philip Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
NAI Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor
Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus and
H Her me and Lain Jung Y and the
K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel. S Friends,
David Sloan Wilson, Ya de Ro Ro Die, Jan
Punter, Romani Charlotte Bli Nico Barba, Adam Hunt Pavlo
Stassi Nale medicine, Gary G Alman Sam of ZED
YPJ Barboa, Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas
Fry Franca, Beto Lati Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary
FTD and W Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio,
Luke Loki, Georges, Theophano Chris Williams and Peter Wo
David Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey Junior,
Old Ebon Starry Michael Bailey. Then spur by Robert
Grassy Zorn Jeff mcmahon, Jake, Zul Barnabas Radis. Mark
Kemple Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris to Kimberley Johnson,
Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perras, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi
Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins
of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A
special thanks to my producers is our web, Jim
Frank Luca Toni, Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes
Dixon Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And
to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan
Knits and Rosie. Thank you for all.